---
layout: article-en
title: Getting VIM right on Mac
---
Opening a brand new MacBook is a pleasant experience. However, there is a bit of
fine-tuning that I do on my Mac, before I start to feel comfortable with it. I
first get my dotfiles from GitHub, and then I compile VIM because the default
VIM in OS X Lion is compiled without Ruby support.

When you have VIM with Ruby support, you can

* Use [Command-T](https://wincent.com/products/command-t), the superb file navigation plugin
* Enjoy Ruby syntax awareness (syntax coloring, proper indentation of code)

The information in this article is also applicable to other \*nix systems
besides OS X. The compilation and Command-T installation steps are not specific
to Mac, but you might need additional compilation parameters when using other
systems.

Don't take the word "right" in the title of this article too seriously. The
purpose in writing this is to document and explain how to compile VIM and
inspire VIM users to try out the Command-T plugin.

## Compiling VIM

VIM can tell you which features it supports. Type in `vim --version | grep
ruby`. If the printed lines contain _-ruby_, it means that your VIM is compiled
without Ruby support. In case VIM already has Ruby support, as it does in most
Ubuntus for example, you can skip compiling and [install
Command-T](#installing_commandt) straight away.

Start by cloning VIM \(you will need a [Mercurial
client](http://mercurial.selenic.com/)\):

`hg clone https://vim.googlecode.com/hg/ vim`

Then compile:

`cd vim`

`./configure --enable-rubyinterp --with-features=huge -prefix=/usr`

`make`

You can give the compiled binary a try by running it with the command `src/vim`.
If everything feels alright, you can install VIM with:

`sudo make install`

This places VIM into _/usr/bin_. Your compiled VIM is now ready for use.

## Installing Command-T

Have you ever seen those guys with incredible dexterity while keyboarding and
text editing on command line? They are probably using VIM. However, file
navigation is clumsy in VIM, unless you use proper add-ons. Command-T is a
plugin you will want to try out if you are serious about doing things on
command-line interface.

Start by downloading the plugin \(the link is from the [plugin's home
page](http://www.vim.org/scripts/script.php?script_id=3025)\):

`curl -L http://www.vim.org/scripts/download_script.php?src_id=17084 >
/tmp/command-t-1.3.1.vba`

Then install the plugin:

`vim /tmp/command-t-1.3.1.vba`

In VIM, type `:so %` to source the plugin. The remaining step is to compile the
C extension:

`cd ~/.vim/ruby/command-t`

`ruby extconf.rb`

`make`

Your Command-T powered VIM is now ready for use. Open VIM in your project's root
and hit the _leader+T_ key combination to access the Command-T presentation of
your project's files. Its almost obscenely cool.

One more thing. On Finnish Mac keyboards the default leader key _'\\'_ is
difficult to press – you need three key presses for it. I suggest that you bind
your leader key to _','_ by adding `:let mapleader = ","` into your _.vimrc_.

## Afterword: VIM, VIm or Vim?

VIM is an abbreviation for VI Improved. VI in turn stands for "visual" in Ex. VI
is also the editor created by Bill Joy.

Bram Moolenaar, the creator of VIM, types VIM with capital letters. Rendering
the word or words as the creator wishes is a fair principle to follow.
